After logging in, the customer receives a user name and password to access the data backup and [backup software](https://backupchain.com/en/backupchain/). Some providers allow the customer to secure their account using two-factor authentication. The technical requirement is Internet access. The software for a [cloud backup](https://backupchain.com/en/cloud-backup/) or even the upload via a website should ensure secure encryption to protect the transferred data from unauthorized access.

Because the data transfer rate of Internet access is usually only a fraction of that of disk drives and local area networks, the backup software can perform data compression as far as this is possible. Data already stored in compressed form - for example, in ZIP, JPEG, MPEG or MP3 file formats - can hardly be compressed any further.

An Internet access with a data transfer rate of 1 Mbit/s can theoretically transfer 450 MB per hour or 10.5 GB per day. This is, for example, a possible data transfer rate when uploading via ADSL 6000 in Germany. With faster Internet access, such as VDSL, even higher data transfer speeds are possible. Some service providers offer to exchange larger amounts of data by mail using hard disks or DVDs, which is particularly useful for a larger initial backup.

Because of the relatively low data transfer rate, the incremental backup method, in which only new and changed data is copied, is particularly important. Some providers use their backup software to scan files for changed parts and transfer only the changed data blocks to the data store (block level). Some recognize when files have only been renamed and do not retransfer them. Renamed file folders and moved files cannot always be recognized again, which can lead to file retransfers.

Some solutions, such as Netzdrive, Novell iFolder, Dropbox, Fabasoft Folio Cloud or Recovery Guard, offer features such as encryption of data on the server, granting file access rights to certain other users or user groups, replication of data to multiple servers and version control of changes, thus achieving characteristics similar to those of so-called distributed file systems. If access can be restricted, the functionality of this backup software partly overlaps with that of file sharing.

Modern providers offer not only [online backup](https://backupchain.com/Online-Backup-Software-Solution.html) in their backup software, but also parallel backup to local media, such as a tape drive or USB peripherals. This combination of local and online backup is called hybrid backup. Companies should make sure that SQL databases, such as Microsoft SQL Server, are supported and that a complete system restore disaster recovery is included in the event of a server failure. It is also useful to have a direct virus scanner integrated into the online backup software, which checks the data to be backed up or restored and thus increases the security of the backup. 
